---
title: Git Notes
date: 2023-05-31 16:00:24 +800
categories: [Notes,Git] # category names may have capital letters and spaces
tags: [terminal,commands,bash,git] # tag names should always be lowercase
---

#### *This is my dumbed-down interpretation of select commands from the `git` manual.*


## Introduction

#### What is this? How do I use it?

`git` is a *"version control system"* for code. 
Basically, you can keep multiple versions of the same project!

It's a command-line utility, so run it from your terminal window.

My installation of `git`, for Windows 10, comes from MSYS2.

### Notes on this document

This document assumes your remote `origin` branch is called, well, `origin`. 


#### What if your remote isn't called `origin`?

If you set it to something else, change instances of `origin` accordingly.

Don't know what your remote origin is called? Run `git remote -v`.


#### That didn't show anything!

This means you haven't created a remote repository yet.


#### What's with those brackets, like in `<name>`?

This are for quickly describing the general usage of commands.

`<` and `>` indicate a **required argument**.

e.g. `git commit -m '<message>'`

* This means that you need to substitute `<message>`, in this case closed within single quotes, with your own text!

* This is because commits always require a text summary describing what was changed.

`[` and `]` indicate an **optional argument**.

e.g. `git branch [-v]`
 
* This means that you can add `-v`, a.k.a. `--verbose` to display more information.

* You can also run `git branch` as is and it will work fine, just with a little less info.


#### What's a `.gitignore`?

[01-gitignore_templates]:https://github.com/github/gitignore

* `.gitignore` is a *filetype* which `git` uses to know which files to **not commit**.

* Language-specific templates can be found in the [github/gitignore repository.][01-gitignore_templates]


---

## Basic Git Commands

`git init`

This creates (i.e., initializes) a local `git` repository in your current working directory.

`git add <file> ...`

This adds specified file/s to be the staging area of your current directory.

* In other words it tells `git` *which* files to be committed.

* Requires at least 1 argument: `<file>`. `...` Means you can stage as many other files as you like. 

#### What if I want to add all my files?
<!-- &lt; represents the < character and &gt; represents the > character. -->

You can replace `<file>` with `.` to stage all files.

* If so, `.` should be the only argument.

* It will also not stage filetypes specified within your `.gitignore` file.

---

`git rm [-r] [--cached] <file> ...`

Removes specified file/s in `<file>` from the current branch. `...` means it can take a variable number of files.

* Do note unlike your typical terminal `rm`, this doesn't delete the file from your system! 

* Also note that you can substitute `.` in place of `<file>`. In that case, it should be the only file argument.

Specifically, this command tells `git` that the input file/s are not to be  part of this branch anymore.

It is best paired with `git commit` so that a particular branch can have different files from another.

#### `rm` Subcommands

`-r` 

Shorthand for "recursive", which is necessary for folders. For individual files, you can omit this.

`--cached`
 
Removal should only happen on the staging index while leaving working directory files alone.


#### Personal Notes

This is helpful when you have already staged some files and changed your mind.

Sometimes, I want to still be able to see this files on my local version.

So this is great because normally `rm` will also hide the file from your view.

---


`git commit -m '<message>'`

Typically used after running `git add`. This will actually commit (i.e. save) your changes to the local repository.

* `-m` is required as all commits must have a message describing them.

* `'<message>'` is a summary of what you changed, enclosed in quotation marks.

## Global Commands

### Configuration

`git config [<options>]`

See the `.gitconfig` file for the parameters you can pass. Here are some of note:


| Field   | Members                | Description                                       |
|---------|------------------------|---------------------------------------------------|
| `user`  | `user.name`            | The username displayed with your commits.         |
| `user`  | `user.email`           | The email with which commits are associated with. |
| `core`  | `core.editor`          | The filepath to your code editor of choice.       |
| `core`  | `core.excludesFile`    | The filepath to your Global `.gitignore` file.    |

`git config --global <member>`

This lets you see the value of the specified member. For example:

```powershell
git config --global user.name
```

`git config --global <member> "<path>"`

Set member's value to your value (enclosed in quotations). For example:

```powershell
git config --global core.excludesFile "C:\Users\crimeraaa\GLOBAL.gitignore"
```

This will set the global `.gitignore` file to whatever your input in `"<path>"`.

This will save you the trouble of placing a `.gitignore` file in every repository. It is best used for filetypes you're **absolutely certain** you never want to stage and commit.

---

### Setting a Global .gitignore

For example, I'm on Windows 10 and have a file named `GLOBAL.gitignore`. 
It's found in `C:\Users\crimeraaa\GLOBAL.gitignore`. 

It doesn't have to be called `GLOBAL.gitignore`. It can be a nameless file of extension `.gitignore`.

As long as you specify the file you're after, it will work.

---

The following examples assume you placed your file in the following directories.

| System  | Directory                 | A.K.A.         |
|---------|---------------------------|----------------|
| *NIX    | `~/`                      | Home Directory |
| Windows | `C:\Users\username\` | User Profile   |

#### Bash

```bash
git config --global core.excludesFile `~/GLOBAL.gitignore`
```

#### Windows Command Prompt

<!-- I'm pretty sure Windows Command Prompt is separate from the Batch scripting language, but whatever... -->

```batch
git config --global core.excludesFile "%USERPROFILE%\GLOBAL.gitignore"
```

#### Windows PowerShell

```powershell
git config --global core.excludesFile "$Env:USERPROFILE\GLOBAL.gitignore"
```

Sidenote: did you know that PowerShell supports some Bash-like syntax?

Using `$HOME` or `~` means the same thing as `$:Env:USERPROFILE`. All of these are case *insensitive.*

However, PowerShell doesn't recognize Command Prompt-esque syntax like `%USERPROFILE%`.

---

## Push and Pull Commands

`git push origin`

* Pushes your current working branch to the main branch found at `origin`.

`git push origin <local-branch>:<remote-branch>`

* Pushes your `<local-branch>` to the specified `<remote-branch>` found in `origin`.

* If `<remote-branch>` doesn't exist, then it will be created! 

* This is a handy way of creating remote branches from the terminal.

## Local Branch Commands

`git branch <name>`

* Creates a new branch of your specified `<name>`.

* Fails if `<name>` is already an existing branch.

`git branch [-v]`

Shows you all existing local branches.

`-v` here means `--verbose`, which just makes it output more info.

[whats-dash-v]:#local-branch-commands

---
    
`git checkout <name>`

Sets your current working branch to your local `<name>` branch.

Fails if `<name>` is not an existing branch.

This can also be used to checkout a previous commit!

## Index Commands

`git [--no-pager] log`

`git -ls-files [--deleted] [--modified] [--others]`

---

## Remote Branch Commands

`git remote [-v]`

Tells you where your branch is remotely hosted. 

* `-v` means `--verbose`. See [`git branch -v`.][whats-dash-v]

`git branch [-v] [-a]`

Shows you all existing local and remote branches..

* `-v` means `--verbose`. See [`git branch -v`.][whats-dash-v]

* `-a` means `--all`, it will show you all available local and remote branches.

---

`git checkout origin`

* This will check out the main branch found in the remote `origin`.

`git checkout origin/<remote-branch-name>`

* This will check out the specified `<remote-branch-name>` found in `origin`.

***Remember to use `/` and not `:`!***
* To exit, run the checkout command again on a local branch name. 

Example:
```powershell
git checkout master
```
Where `master` is the exact name of a local branch we want to check out.